# Festival Calendar Basics

[Top: Intro](README.md) | [Next: The Conciliar Calendar](conciliar-calendar.md)

## The Months

The Athenian "festival year" consisted of twelve lunar months:

1. Hekatombaiṓn
2. Metageitniṓn
3. Boēdromiṓn
4. Puanopsiṓn
5. Maimaktēriṓn
6. Posideiṓn
7. Gamēliṓn
8. Anthestēriṓn
9. Elaphēboliṓn
10. Mounuchiṓn
11. Thargēliṓn
12. Skirophoriṓn

Cities thoughout Greece used calendars based on principles similar to those of the Athenian calendar, but the names of the months varied. In Argos, for instance, they were Agúeios, Karneîos, Erithaieos, Hermaîos, Gámos, Téleos, Arneîos, Artamítios, Agriánios, Amuklaîos, Pánamos, and Apellaîos. We know the names of some of the Spartan months--Agriános, Artemísios, Geraístios, Hekatombeús, Hērásios, Karneîos, Huakínthios, Phliásios-- but not their precise order (Samuel 1972, 93).

Many are obviously named for festivals which shows their religious nature. The festival calendar is so called to distinguish it from the Athenian [conciliar calendar](conciliar-calendar.md) (which we will get to) and because it provided timing for the many, many religious celebrations that the Greeks held. Some days were always sacred to a particular god--the 3rd of every month to Athena and 7th to Apollo for example. The first few days of every month were taken up with festivals like this (Mikalson 1976 14-20). Other celebrations were held once a year, such as the major Athenian festivals (Mikalson 1976 201): 

* Panathenaia: Hekatombaiṓn 23-30
* Eleusinia: Metageitniṓn 15-18
* Apatouria: Puanopsiṓn 19-21 or 26-28
* Lenaia: Gamēliṓn 12-21
* Lesser Eleusinia: Anthestēriṓn 20-26
* City Dionysia: Elaphēboliṓn 10-16

Each month was 30 days long (called [_plḗrēs_](https://logeion.uchicago.edu/%CF%80%CE%BB%CE%AE%CF%81%CE%B7%CF%82) or "full") or 29 (called [_koîlos_](https://logeion.uchicago.edu/%CE%BA%CE%BF%E1%BF%96%CE%BB%CE%BF%CF%82) "hollow"). In an "ideal" year there were six of each making for a year of 354 days. Unlike our Gregorian calendar in which the lengths of all the months (except for February) are fixed, an Athenian month was not always one length, but might be full in one year and hollow in another. In the simplest conception of the calendar the full and hollow months alternate, but it is equally valid and simple to imagine either the odd-numbered or even-numbered months as full: 

![idealized year](img/ideal.png)

For charts of the calendar like this a darker, green color will indicate full months and lighter, tan color hollow months (the “F” stands for “festival year”, “C” will mean “conciliar year”). The first row shows a year where the six full months are the odd-numbered months, the second row the even numbered months.

## The Year

The Greek calendar, like many calendars around the ancient Mediterranean, is a [lunisolar calendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lunisolar_calendar) meaning that it depends partly on the moon, partly on the sun. The year began in Athens on the first full moon after the summer solstice, and so you needed to track one solar event and one lunar event to know when Hekatombaiṓn 1 had arrived. For purposes of reconstructing historical years, we can start with modern calculations of both. For instance, the summer solstice in 424 BCE occurred on June 28 and the next new moon was on July 17 so Hekatombaiṓn for that year must have started around then (we will take up that "around" shortly). Since Athenian years start in the summer, when we convert them to Julian years we usually refer to them as a span of two. For example, 424/423 or 424/3 means "the Athenian year that began after the summer solstice of 424 BCE, and ran until the summer of 423 BCE."

(One brief note: Ancient dates are conventionally calculated according to the [Julian calendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_calendar)--that is, a 365 day year with every fourth a leap year of 366 days--projected backwards from Roman times. Our modern, [Gregorian calendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregorian_calendar) makes the small correction of skipping the leap year every 400 years. This difference between the Julian and Gregorian calendars is why the summer solstice today is usually June 21 while it is calculated as June 28 in the 5th century BCE.)

The time when the year started was another point of difference between
the calendars of different Greek cities. The month names used in
Delos, for instance--Lēnaiṓn, Hierós, Galaksiṓn, Artemisiṓn,
Thargēliṓn, Pánēmos, Hekatombaiṓn, Metageitniṓn, Bouphoniṓn,
Apatouriṓn, Arēsiṓn, Posideṓn--shared several with those used in
Athens, but in a different order because the year in Delos started
after the _winter_ solstice rather than after the summer (Samuel 1972,
99-100). 

Aristophanes' _Clouds_ was first performed at the City Dionysia in
424/423. Since the City Dionysia was held on Elaphēboliṓn 10-16, to
find a Julian date for this performance from our ideal year, we would
first add up the lengths of full and hollow months before
Elaphēboliṓn--4 × 30 + 4 × 29 = 236--and add 10 to find day of the
year, 246, of the first day of the festival. The summer solstice of
424 was on June 28, and first new moon after the solstice July 17. Of
we take this date as the start of the year, the 246th day,
Elaphēboliṓn 10, is March 19 and the 252nd, Elaphēboliṓn 16, is March
25th, 423 BCE. It does not matter which version of the ideal we
choose, since Elaphēboliṓn is preceeded by 4 full and 4 hollow months
in both.

### Intercalary Years

With a lunisolar calendar that begins after the summer solstice, about every three years the twelfth month will end _before_ the next solstice. Imagine a year in which the solstice occurs on the first day of the last month, Skirophoriṓn. In our idealized year, Skirophoriṓn is hollow so we reach the end of this year 29 days later. The next year then starts on Hekatombaiṓn 1, 29 days after the solstice which we can call here SOL + 29. Because of the difference in length between the solar year and 12 lunar months, the next solstice will fall not on the next Skirophoriṓn 1 but on Skirophoriṓn 12. The second year will then begin on SOL + 18 (11 days sooner than SOL + 29). The third solstice will fall on Skirophoriṓn 23, and the third year begins only 7 days later on SOL + 7. As we approach the fourth year, Skirophoriṓn ends _before_ the solstice and if Hekatombaiṓn were start right away it would be on SOL _minus_ 4.

In the diagram below, the top row represents the Athenian years with their months alternating between full (green) and hollow (tan). Each Skirophoriṓn is marked "S". The beginning of each Athenian year is indicated by the arrow and by Hekatombaiṓn marked "H". The bottom row represents the solar year running 365 days from solstice to solstice. The "red zone" at the end shows where the twelfth month ends before the solstice.

![Intercalation shorfall](img/intercalation-shortfall.png)

To make sure that the year began after the solstice, the ancient Greeks would add an extra month to the calendar when necessary. This is called an "intercalation" and a year with an intercalation is called "intercalary" (as opposed to "ordinary"). As the scenario above shows, about every third year you will need a thirteenth month to extend the year past the solstice. The Athenians usually intecalated in the middle of the year, which we represent in the diagram below as a month with the pattern of dots. The top shows an intercalation after the sixth month in our idealized year with odd-numbered full months, the bottom an intercalation after the sixth month in an even-numbered-full year:

![idealized intercalary year](img/ideal-intercalated.png)

Since this intercalation follows the month Posideiṓn it would be called _Posideiṓn hústeros_ "later Posideiṓn", _Posideiṓn deúteros_ "second Posideiṓn" or _Posideiṓn embólimos_ "injected Posideiṓn." When we abbreviate we will indicate this with a subscript number 2: Pos₂. Intercalations were most commonly made after Posideiṓn, but they could occur anywhere in the year, such as after Hekatombaiṓn:

![idealized intercalary year](img/ideal-hek2.png)

or after Skirophoriṓn: 

![idealized intercalary year](img/ideal-ski2.png)


Or anywhere in between. We do not know how this choice was made for any particular intercalary year.

The first year on the Pos₂ chart and the Ski₂ chart above have seven full and six hollow months for a total of 384 days. This is often given as the "normal" length of an intercalary year and if the Athenians had wished they could have made sure to only ever intercalate a full month so that itercalary years would always have 384 days. It is likely, though, that there were intercalary years like the second Pos₂ chart and the Hek₂ year above, with 383 days (six full months and seven hollow). It also seems that it was possible to have a 355-day ordinary year (seven full months and 5 hollow), but it is less certain whether there could be 353 or 385 day years. In any case, an "idealized" year is a fiction. Even with a regular alternation of full and hollow months at some point you will have a year that is 383 days rather than 384, or 355 rather than 354, or has two full or two hollow months in a row. Debate about the nature of the Athenian calendar revolves around how regular or irregular it really was and how the evidence, mostly from inscriptions, should be interpreted to fit one theory or another.

## Really Lunar Months

The time between one new moon and the next--a ["lunation" or "synodic
month"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lunar_month#Synodic_month)--is
29.53 days on average, plus or minus about 7 hours in any given
lunation. This is what gives us the alternation between 29 and 30 day
months in a lunisolar calendar. It has long been a matter of debate
how rigid or flexible the Athenians were with their calendar and
whether the succession of full and hollow months was based on some
system, on calculation, or on direct observation of the crescent of
the new moon. Heniautos generates example calendars for ancient dates
based on the assumption that all months began on actual, observed new
moons. This is both because I believe it is true, and because this is
where a computer is most helpful. If you believe this assumption is
wrong, Heniautos will still help you to generate counter-examples to
show that.

In order to do this, Heniautos uses a simplified approximation of
observation, by default, treating the second day after the
[conjunction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjunction_(astronomy))
as the day when the first light of the waxing new moon was visible.
Here is the calendar for 424/3 BCE (showing output from the [Heniautos
command](heniautos-command.md)):

    > heniautos 424 -m
         Year     |        Month          |      Start      | Days
    --------------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----
    BCE 424/423   | Hekatombaiṓn          | BCE 0424-Jul-19 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Metageitniṓn          | BCE 0424-Aug-17 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Boēdromiṓn            | BCE 0424-Sep-16 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Puanopsiṓn            | BCE 0424-Oct-15 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Maimaktēriṓn          | BCE 0424-Nov-13 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Posideiṓn             | BCE 0424-Dec-13 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Gamēliṓn              | BCE 0423-Jan-12 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Anthestēriṓn          | BCE 0423-Feb-10 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Elaphēboliṓn          | BCE 0423-Mar-12 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Mounuchiṓn            | BCE 0423-Apr-11 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Thargēliṓn            | BCE 0423-May-10 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Skirophoriṓn          | BCE 0423-Jun-09 |   29    

The command `heniautos 424` gives us the year that began in 424 BCE
(that is, 424/3) The `-m` option tells Heniautos to output a monthly
summary (see [`heniautos` Command](heniautos-command.md) for
details). The fields are the Athenian Year, the month, the Julian date
of the first day of the month, and the number of days in the
month. This year does not start on the day of the new moon (July 17,
as we saw above) but on the second day after, July 19. You can see
that the actual astronomical lunations _are_ either 29 or 30 days, but
they do _not_ alternate regularly. This is perhaps easier to see on a
chart:

![424/3 BCE](img/424.png)

By this reconstruction, for example, the City Dionysia of 424/423
(Elaphēboliṓn 10-16) where Aristophanes' _Clouds_ was first performed
took place March 21-27, 423 BC. It worth noting that in terms of the
_days of the year_ this is no different from the hypothetical "ideal"
calendar, at least so fas as Elaphēboliṓn is concerned. Elaphēboliṓn
is preceded by four full and four hollow months in both, so
Elaphēboliṓn 10-16 are still the 246th-252nd days of the year. The
astronomical data simply suggests a different order, and the "second
day rule" moves the Julian dates two days later.

### Why Two Days?

If the ancient Athenians used observations of the new moon to fix the beginning of each month (a hypothesis used by Heniautos) then exactly what "observation" means takes a little explaining. The conjunction (by which astronomers define the new moon) is the moment when the Earth, Moon, and Sun are all in a line. This moment often happens in the the daytime, and the moon is only ever visible at the conjunction when it causes an eclipse. The "common-sense" definition of the new moon is not the conjunction but the moment when the first sliver of a waxing crescent is visible to the human eye.

To return to the example of Elaphēboliṓn 424/3, Heniautos calculates its first day as March 12, 423 BCE. There was an (astronomical) new moon on March 10 at 2:36 PM. When the sun set that evening the moon was probably low on the horizon and almost certainly too faint to see. The default "second day" rule used by Heniautos assumes that the crescent is not visible until the day after the conjunction. If the moon was visible on the next day, though, March 11, why not say that this was the first day of Elaphēboliṓn?

The ancient Greeks probably defined the day as beginning at sunset (Samuel 1972, 13; Pritchett 1999, 85-89 would disagree), not at midnight or sunrise as we do. When the conjunction occured in the afternoon of March 10, it would have been Anthestēriṓn 29 in Athens. When the sun set that evening the next day began, so it was now Anthestēriṓn 30 to an Athenian even though to us it was still March 10. When the first light of the crescent was observed after sunset on March 11, the Athenian would say "Now it is Elaphēboliṓn." Therefore Elaphēboliṓn 424/3 technically did start in the evening of March 11. However, if there was a meeting of the Ekklēsía on Elaphēboliṓn 1, it would have happened in the daylight hours on March 12. For simplicity we say that the equivalent Greek and Julian days are the days of these overlapping "business" hours, as indicated on the chart below.

![Ela 1/March 12 423 BCE](img/ela-1-mar-12.png)

The top row shows the span of the Greek days, beginning at sunsets (marked by the arrows). The bottom row shows "modern" days, offset because they begin at midnight.

This is the same as the Jewish and Islamic calendars still in use. Days begin at sunset so while we say that Shabbat is "Saturday" it begins in the evening on Friday, as Juma is "Friday" but begins on Thursday. The modern Jewish and Islamic calendars are identical in many ways the to Greek calendar and they all descend from the ancient [Babylonian Calendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylonian_calendar) (as do our 12- and 24-hour days, 60-minute hours, and 360° circles).

Heniautos provides two other options for estimating the visible new moon besides the "second day rule." Since we do not know how the Athenians determined the first day of a month, or for sure when their day started or how this might have changed over time, it is important to consider all of the possibilities. 

The median of the number of hours after the astronomical conjunction that the new moon becomes visible (at Athens) is 41.5 hours (see Dunn 1998, 214-216)--just under two days or, to put it another way, just over one. Heniautos can also use a "next day rule," that estimates the visible new moon as one day after the conjunction. To use this with the `heniautos` command, add `-r 1` or `--rule 1`. For 424/3 BCE this simply has the effect of advancing all the dates one day:

    > heniautos 424 -m -r 1
         Year     |        Month          |      Start      | Days
    --------------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----
    BCE 424/423   | Hekatombaiṓn          | BCE 0424-Jul-18 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Metageitniṓn          | BCE 0424-Aug-16 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Boēdromiṓn            | BCE 0424-Sep-15 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Puanopsiṓn            | BCE 0424-Oct-14 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Maimaktēriṓn          | BCE 0424-Nov-12 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Posideiṓn             | BCE 0424-Dec-12 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Gamēliṓn              | BCE 0423-Jan-11 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Anthestēriṓn          | BCE 0423-Feb-09 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Elaphēboliṓn          | BCE 0423-Mar-11 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Mounuchiṓn            | BCE 0423-Apr-10 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Thargēliṓn            | BCE 0423-May-09 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Skirophoriṓn          | BCE 0423-Jun-08 |   29 

You can also use `-r 0` to treat months as starting on the day of the astronomical conjunction (which Greek astronomers understood and were perfectly able to calculate). `-r 0` will move all the 424/3 dates up one more day:

    > heniautos 424 -m -r 0 
         Year     |        Month          |      Start      | Days
    --------------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----
    BCE 424/423   | Hekatombaiṓn          | BCE 0424-Jul-17 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Metageitniṓn          | BCE 0424-Aug-15 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Boēdromiṓn            | BCE 0424-Sep-14 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Puanopsiṓn            | BCE 0424-Oct-13 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Maimaktēriṓn          | BCE 0424-Nov-11 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Posideiṓn             | BCE 0424-Dec-11 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Gamēliṓn              | BCE 0423-Jan-10 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Anthestēriṓn          | BCE 0423-Feb-08 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Elaphēboliṓn          | BCE 0423-Mar-10 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Mounuchiṓn            | BCE 0423-Apr-09 |   29
    BCE 424/423   | Thargēliṓn            | BCE 0423-May-08 |   30
    BCE 424/423   | Skirophoriṓn          | BCE 0423-Jun-07 |   29

The truth is probably somewhere in between--sometimes `-r 2` will give
the correct dates, if we can determine what they are and sometimes `-r
1`. Any of these options is adequate for saying the that the City
Dionysia took place and Aristophanes' _Clouds_ was staged for the
first time _around_ March 21-27, 423 BCE. The choice of rule can,
however, have a large impact on intercalations if the generated
calendar is for a year when a new moon is very close to the solstice.

## Heniautos and Intercalations
 
Heniautos intercalates when it is astronomically necessary. The year
406/5, for instance, begins on July 1 and the twelfth month ends on
June 18, too soon for the next month to begin after the summer
solstice. Heniautos therefore intercalates a second Posideiṓn (by
default):

    > heniautos 406 -m  
         Year     |        Month          |      Start      | Days
    --------------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----
    BCE 406/405   | Hekatombaiṓn          | BCE 0406-Jul-01 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Metageitniṓn          | BCE 0406-Jul-30 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Boēdromiṓn            | BCE 0406-Aug-28 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Puanopsiṓn            | BCE 0406-Sep-27 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Maimaktēriṓn          | BCE 0406-Oct-26 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Posideiṓn             | BCE 0406-Nov-25 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Posideiṓn hústeros    | BCE 0406-Dec-24 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Gamēliṓn              | BCE 0405-Jan-23 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Anthestēriṓn          | BCE 0405-Feb-22 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Elaphēboliṓn          | BCE 0405-Mar-22 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Mounuchiṓn            | BCE 0405-Apr-21 |   30
    BCE 406/405   | Thargēliṓn            | BCE 0405-May-21 |   29
    BCE 406/405   | Skirophoriṓn          | BCE 0405-Jun-19 |   30

The diagram for the year looks like this:
![406/5 BCE](img/406.png)

If you require accuracy, for scholary or other reasons, you need to
take care with intercalations. These astronomical calculations are a
good guide, but in the absence of historical evidence we cannot be
sure that any year was ordinary or intercalary. We are not sure how
the Athenians decided when to intercalate not do we know how much they
were concerned with astronomical accuracy.

When a new moon is very close to the solstice, when and how the moon
was observed becomes very important. Take the years 321-319, for
instance. If we give `heniautos` two years, a start year and an end
year, it will generate the calendar for all years in the range. This
is most useful with the `-y` or year summary option but works with
others as well. The fields in the year summary are the Athenian year,
whether the year is ordinary (O) or intercalary (I), and the Julian
date of the first day of the year.

    > heniautos 321 319 -y 
         Year     | Y |      Start      | Days
    --------------|---|-----------------|-----
    BCE 321/320   | O | BCE 0321-Jul-19 |  355
    BCE 320/319   | O | BCE 0320-Jul-09 |  354
    BCE 319/318   | I | BCE 0319-Jun-28 |  384
    
By the default "second day rule" Heniautos makes the year 320/19 ordinary and 319/8 intercalary. 319/318 begins on the day of the solstice however, so 320/19 lasts just long enough to not need intercalation. With the next day rule, however:

    > heniautos 321 319 -y -r 1
         Year     | Y |      Start      | Days
    --------------|---|-----------------|-----
    BCE 321/320   | O | BCE 0321-Jul-18 |  355
    BCE 320/319   | I | BCE 0320-Jul-08 |  384
    BCE 319/318   | O | BCE 0319-Jul-27 |  354

This shifts the dates so that 320/19 is intercalated and 319/8 ordinary. In fact we know from two inscriptions ([IG II² 381](https://epigraphy.packhum.org/text/2598?hs=250-274) & [382](https://epigraphy.packhum.org/text/2599?hs=267-289)) that 320/19 had a _Posideiṓn hústeros_. For 320/19 BCE, `-r 0` or `-r 1` will give a defensible result, the default `-r 2` will not.

## Fun with Hypothetical Calendars

While the traditional Greek calendar was replaced by the Julian calendar as Greece came under closer control by the Roman Empire, we can make a hypothetical Athenian calendar for any year, including modern ones, since the astronomy does not change. `heniautos` treats the years you give it as BCE by default, but with the `--as-ce` parameter you can change this and get a calendar for, say, 2021/2 CE:

    > heniautos 2021 -m --as-ce 
         Year     |        Month          |      Start      | Days
    --------------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----
     CE 2021/2022 | Hekatombaiṓn          |  CE 2021-Jul-12 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Metageitniṓn          |  CE 2021-Aug-10 |   30
     CE 2021/2022 | Boēdromiṓn            |  CE 2021-Sep-09 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Puanopsiṓn            |  CE 2021-Oct-08 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Maimaktēriṓn          |  CE 2021-Nov-06 |   30
     CE 2021/2022 | Posideiṓn             |  CE 2021-Dec-06 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Gamēliṓn              |  CE 2022-Jan-04 |   30
     CE 2021/2022 | Anthestēriṓn          |  CE 2022-Feb-03 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Elaphēboliṓn          |  CE 2022-Mar-04 |   30
     CE 2021/2022 | Mounuchiṓn            |  CE 2022-Apr-03 |   29
     CE 2021/2022 | Thargēliṓn            |  CE 2022-May-02 |   30
     CE 2021/2022 | Skirophoriṓn          |  CE 2022-Jun-01 |   30


[Top: Intro](README.md) | [Next: The Conciliar Calendar](conciliar-calendar.md)

## Works Cited

* Dunn, Francis M. 1998. “Tampering with the Calendar.” _Zeitschrift Für Papyrologie und Epigraphik_ 123: 213–31.
* Mikalson, Jon D. 1976. _Sacred and Civil Calendar of the Athenian Year_. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Pritchett, W. Kendrick. 1999. “Postscript: The Athenian Calendars.” _Zeitschrift für Papyrologie Und Epigraphik_ 128: 79–93.
* Samuel, Alan Edouard. 1972. _Greek and Roman Chronology: Calendars and Years in Classical Antiquity_. Handbuch Der Altertumswissenschaft, 1. Abt., 7. T. München: Beck.

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/80x15.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.
